Grammar and readability fixes to overview (#1279)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/overview.md

This document provides an overview of the pillars of telemetry that
OpenTelemetry supports and defines important fundamental terms.

You can find additional definitions for these terms in the [glossary](glossary.md).

## Distributed tracing

A distributed trace is a set of events triggered as a result of a single
logical operation and consolidated across various components of an application. A
distributed trace contains events that cross process, network, and security
boundaries. For example, a distributed trace might be initiated when someone
presses a button to start an action on a website. The trace represents
calls made between the downstream services that handled the chain of requests
initiated by the button being pressed.

### Trace

> **Traces** in OpenTelemetry are defined implicitly by their spans. In

Reviewer: I'm curious whether we can use the singular form when defining a term. For example, the following sentence uses the singular form.

Also it would be better to define or add a link to "span", since it's used for the first time in this doc, and actually "span" *is* the main concept here since a trace is defined *by* span :wink:

I know there are some discussion around removing span itself.. 

(We may focus on grammar/readability for this PR for now)

Author: Addressed by adding a little more context/definition around span.

This document provides an overview of the pillars of telemetry that
OpenTelemetry supports and defines important fundamental terms.

You can find additional definitions for these terms in the [glossary](glossary.md).

## Distributed tracing

A distributed trace is a set of events triggered as a result of a single
logical operation and consolidated across various components of an application. A
distributed trace contains events that cross process, network, and security
boundaries. For example, a distributed trace might be initiated when someone
presses a button to start an action on a website. The trace represents
calls made between the downstream services that handled the chain of requests
initiated by the button being pressed.

### Trace

> **Traces** in OpenTelemetry are defined implicitly by their **Spans**. A span is
> the building block of a trace and is a named, timed operation that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Traces** in OpenTelemetry are defined implicitly by their **Spans**. A span is
a named, timed operation that
```

"defined implicitly by their Spans" already implies that Spans are the building blocks.

> represents a piece of the workflow in a distributed system. In
> particular, you can think of a trace as a directed acyclic graph (DAG) of
> spans, where the edges between spans are defined as parent/child

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
represents a piece of the workflow in a distributed system. 
A trace is then a directed acyclic graph (DAG) of
spans, where the edges between spans are defined as parent/child
```

relationship.

> For example, the following example shows a trace made up of six spans:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example shows a trace made up of six spans:
```

### Span

Each span encapsulates the following state:

- An operation name

> - A start and end timestamp

Reviewer: Since a span has a start timestamp and an end stamps separate - this should be corrected accordingly. A start and an end timestamp - or timestamps of starting and ending? Hm..

Author: Addressed.

- [**Attributes**](./common/common.md#attributes) as a list of key-value pairs
- A set of zero or more **Events**, each of which is itself a tuple with a timestamp, name, and [**Attributes**](./common/common.md#attributes)). The name must be a string.
- The parent's span identifier.
- [**Links**](#links-between-spans) to zero or more causally-related spans via the SpanContext of those related spans.

> - **SpanContext**, which is information required to reference a span. See the next section for more information.

Reviewer: Maybe this is not the scope of this PR.. but I'm wondering why we use "span context", not "SpanContext", for the term.

Most specs I read define terms with plain words, instead of making up new words like this..

Author: I was wondering that too, but then I found this: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/trace/api.md#spancontext

That part of the specification uses a lot of code text for all these terms. Is that another section I should address to remove that formatting? Or is it different because it's the API?

trace rather than trusting the incoming trace context. The new linked trace can
also represent a long-running asynchronous data processing operation
initiated by one of many fast incoming requests.

When you use the scatter/gather (or fork/join) pattern, the root
operation starts multiple downstream processing operations that are
aggregated back into a single span. The last span is linked to many
operations that it aggregates. All the spans are from the same trace and are
similar to the parent field of a span. However, in this scenario it's a best
practice to not set the parent of the spans, because semantically the parent field
represents a single-parent scenario. In many cases the parent span fully
encloses the child spans, which is not the case in scatter/gather and batch
scenarios.

## Metrics

OpenTelemetry lets you record raw measurements or metrics with a predefined
aggregation and set of labels.

By recording raw measurements using the OpenTelemetry API, you allow the
end user to determine which aggregation algorithm to apply to the metric, as
well as what labels (dimensions) to define. The API
is used in client libraries like gRPC to record raw measurements like

> "server_latency" or "received_bytes". The end user decides what type of

Reviewer: For "server_latency" - probably we can use `server_latency` instead?

Author: Addressed.

### Span

A span is the primary building block of a distributed trace,
representing an individual unit of work done in a distributed
system. Each span encapsulates the following state:

- An operation name.
- A start timestamp and an end timestamp.

> - [**Attributes**](./common/common.md#attributes) as a list of key-value pairs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [**Attributes**](./common/common.md#attributes), i.e., a list of key-value pairs.
```

> - A set of zero or more **Events**, each of which is itself a tuple with a timestamp, name, and [**Attributes**](./common/common.md#attributes)). The name must be a string.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Events**, which are tuples with a timestamp, name, and [**Attributes**](./common/common.md#attributes)).
```

- The parent's span identifier.

> - [**Links**](#links-between-spans) to zero or more causally-related spans via the SpanContext of those related spans.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [**Links**](#links-between-spans) to zero or more causally-related spans (in different or the same trace) via the SpanContext of those related spans.
```

- **SpanContext**, which is information required to reference a span. See the next section for more information.

### SpanContext

SpanContext represents all the information that identifies a span in the trace.

> SpanContext must be propagated to child spans and across process boundaries. A

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By propagating a SpanContext to child spans and across process boundaries, parent-child relationships can be formed. A
```

SpanContext contains the tracing identifiers and options that are
propagated from parent to child spans.

SpanContext includes the following elements:

- **TraceId** is the identifier for a trace. It is worldwide unique with

>   practically sufficient probability by consisting of 16 randomly-generated

Reviewer 2: Are you sure about that hyphen?

with attributes provided by a prior service in the same transaction. This process
helps establish a causal relationship between the related events.

While you can use Baggage to prototype other cross-cutting concerns, it's
primarily intended to convey values for the OpenTelemetry observability systems.

These values can be consumed by Baggage and used as additional dimensions for metrics,
or additional context for logs and traces. Here are some examples:

- A web service can benefit from including context around what service sent the request.
- A SaaS provider can include context about the API user or token responsible for that request.
- You can determine that a particular browser version is associated with a failure in an image processing service.

For backwards compatibility with OpenTracing, Baggage is propagated as `Baggage` when
using the OpenTracing bridge. If you have concerns about different criteria, consider creating a new
cross-cutting concern to cover your use case. You might benefit from the W3C encoding format, but
use a new HTTP header to convey data throughout a distributed trace.

## Resources

> **Resource** captures information about the entity for which telemetry is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Resource captures information about the entity for which telemetry is
```

You previously dropped bold when the name was already in the section title I think.

recorded. For example, metrics exposed by a Kubernetes container might be linked
to a resource that specifies the cluster, namespace, pod, and container name.

> Resource may capture an entire hierarchy of entity identification. It may

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Resource may capture an entire hierarchy of entity identification. It may
```

describe the host in the cloud and a specific container or application running
in the process.

> Some of the process identification information can be associated with
> telemetry automatically by OpenTelemetry SDK or a specific exporter. See
> OpenTelemetry
> [proto](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/a46c815aa5e85a52deb6cb35b8bc182fb3ca86a0/src/opentelemetry/proto/agent/common/v1/common.proto#L28-L96)
> for an example.

Reviewer 2: That part is completely obsolete and should be removed.

```suggestion
```

Maybe we can replace it with the SDK-provided default attributes later.

For more information, see the OpenTelemetry Service [Long-term
Vision](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/master/docs/vision.md).

## Instrumentation Libraries

The inspiration of the OpenTelemetry project is to make every library and application
observable out of the box by having them call the OpenTelemetry API directly. However,
many libraries don't have this integration. Therefore, you need a separate library to
inject such calls using mechanisms like wrapping interfaces, subscribing to
library-specific callbacks, or translating existing telemetry into the OpenTelemetry model.

A library that enables OpenTelemetry observability for another library is called
an [Instrumentation Library](glossary.md#instrumentation-library).

You should name an instrumentation library to follow any naming conventions of
the instrumented library (e.g. 'middleware' for a web framework).

If there's no established name, the recommendation is to prefix packages
with "opentelemetry-instrumentation", followed by the instrumented library
name itself. Examples include:

* opentelemetry-instrumentation-flask (Python)
* @opentelemetry/instrumentation-grpc (Javascript)

> See [Instrumentation Library](glossary.md#instrumentation-library)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See also [Instrumentation Library](glossary.md#instrumentation-library) in the glossary.
```
